Mentoring philosophy My goal as your mentor is to help you become the type of scientist you want to be, whether it is in industry or academics, basic, translational or clinical, whether you stay in hematology or take the skills you've learned to another discipline. My PhD was in virology, for example; now I study sickle cell disease. While my focus is   to guide you in performing independent research, I seek to contribute to the development of the whole person. To do that, I need to understand your current intellectual and professional state as well as your future plans. Each person I mentor is different, and may have different goals, but I will help you develop certain universal skills: how to ask a compelling scientific question, how to design experiments to answer it, and how to interpret and present your findings. You should expect to have other mentors with other strengths, and know I support activities that broaden your personal and professional development. I'm happy to help you network and identify other mentors.I will work tirelessly for the good of the lab. The success of every member of our group is my top priority. As part of my job as PI, I am expected to write grants and initiate research that will make meaningful contributions to science, the academic community, and to society. You will help me carry out this research, which demands good and ethical scientific methods. It is imperative that we carry out good scientific methods and conduct ourselves in an ethical way. Publishing in scientific journals, presenting our findings at scientific meetings, and communicating our work's value to the public must remain priorities to advance our field. I also value outreach and informal science education, both in the classroom and with the public. I expect you to participate in this component of our lab mission while you are part of the lab group.I will be your advocate. If you have a problem or challenge, come and see me. I will do my best to listen and identify a path that will assist in resolving or moving forward. I will facilitate your training in complementary skills needed to be a successful scientist. These include oral and written communication skills, grant writing experience, compliance with all grant and publication guidelines, scientific policy, and professionalism. I will encourage you to apply for awards, fellowships, and similar opportunities. If you commit to applying for an award or fellowship, I will work with you to ensure that your application is competitive. Similarly, I will recommend job, networking, and collaboration opportunities, arranging introductions if desired. I will support your leadership and service aspirations with advice, letters of recommendation, and more as you request.I will provide you with feedback on your written work. Preparing scientific presentations,publications, and abstracts across groups and formats is a learned skill that requires writing and re-writing. My schedule cannot accommodate extensive notes and revisions without my receiving your drafts and their deadlines in a timely manner (usually a minimum of one week). Arguments based on quantitative data or theory warrant figures or tables that support your point. It is essential to visually display quantitative data. I am committed to maintaining a cohesive and strong laboratory. Trainees associated with my research program and laboratory reflect upon all members of the lab, so that we strive to maintain a supportive culture for all, a high level of professionalism, and some continuity of "branding," writing, and presentation styles across lab personnel. This means I may ask you to support other trainees at conferences or meetings and change your template, colors, or vocabulary in a paper or presentation. I will encourage you to attend scientific/professional meetings and will try to fund such activities. I cannot cover all requests, but you should expect to attend at least one major conference per year when you have material to present. Please use conferences as an opportunity to further your education and share that education with all in the lab. If you register for a conference, I expect you to attend the scientific sessions and participate in conference activities as a professional representative of the lab. Upon your return from aconference, I expect you to share the excitement of conference activities and science with lab members at lab meeting and journal club presentations, particularly with those who did not attend. If grant money is unavailable, I will help you identify and apply for alternative sources of funding to support your participation.I will strive to be supportive, equitable, accessible, encouraging, and respectful. I am human and can be impatient, short-tempered, sleep-deprived, and forgetful, but I will always seek to be kind and respectful to you in our interactions. I know that each student comes from a different background and has different expectations for professional interactions and personal and professional goals. It will help if you bring your whole self to the research experience and keep me informed about your experiences. My role is to foster your professional confidence, critical thinking, and creativity. If my attempts to do this are ineffective, I am open to discussing other ways to achieve these goals.What I will expect from you:1. Plan, design, and conduct high quality scientific research2. Present and document your scientific findings3. Stay current with the literature, and modern methods of scientific communication4. Be honest, ethical, and enthusiastic5. Engage with the research group and other on-campus programs6. Respect your lab mates, our collaborators, our lab funds, equipment, and materials7. Take advantage of professional development opportunities in this institution8. Work hard - don't give up!Update me regularly on progress in your activities and experiments. Make sure that youcommunicate new ideas about your work and any challenges. Remember - I cannot address or advise about issues that you do not bring to my attention. If something is timely or urgent, you should contact me via text, email, or phone call at any time; I can respond more easily with these methods when I am in other meetings.Contribute to scientific writing and publications. The lab's success, funding, and reputation depend on peer-reviewed publications, a standard of academic accomplishment to which I expect you to contribute. However, I will also recognize your work's broad range of impacts: teaching, outreach and service, patent and invention development, and mentoring. Your contributions to science, engineering, medicine, and society can stretch beyond journal publications and enhance your impact as an investigator.Attend and actively participate in all group meetings, as well as seminars that are part of your educational program. Group meetings call for not only presenting your own work but also sharing your insights to help other lab members. Do your part to respect others and engage.Strive to be the very best lab citizen. Take part in shared laboratory responsibilities and uselaboratory resources carefully. Maintain a safe and clean laboratory space where data and research resources are protected. Respect, tolerate, and work collegially with all colleagues, including collaborators. Appreciate individual differences in values, personalities, work styles, and theoretical perspectives.Be a good collaborator. Collaborate in and beyond our lab group. Collaborations are more than just publishing papers together. They demand effective and frequent communication, mutual respect, trust, and shared goals.Leave no trace. You will often use equipment that does not belong to our lab, such as sharedresources and equipment in collaborator labs. Respect this equipment and treat it even more carefully than our own. Always return it as soon as possible in its original condition. If something breaks, tell me right away so that we can fix or replace it. Don't panic over broken equipment. Mistakes happen. But it is unacceptable to return something damaged without taking the steps necessary to fix it.Acknowledge the efforts of collaborators. This includes other members of the lab as well as those outside the lab. Always inform me if someone helps you intellectually or materially, even when they are not in my current collaborator's lab, so that I can interact with that lab PI to appropriately recognize and acknowledge that effort. This can include copying me and other principal investigators on emails when expertise, experience, or equipment is shared.Present your work to others in the field at meetings and seminars and in scientific articles. Published papers, the "currency" in science, drive much of our research. Supporting taxpayer dollars require that we share our findings. I will push you to publish your research as you move through your training. Master's students are expected to author or make major contributions. While there is no set level of productivity for any one trainee, doctoral students are expected to be lead author on at least two journal papers submissions, preferably three or four. In addition, postdoctoral research associates are best positioned to seek additional employment with a first-author paper in review or accepted along with co-authorship on the lab's multiple other publications.Keep up with the literature to guide your own research. Block at least one hour per week to do literature searches. Participate in journal clubs and suggest new articles of interest to the lab. Sharing scientific literature with multiple members of the lab helps us all to stay informed, innovate, and achieve excellence.Be responsive to advice and constructive criticism. The feedback you get from me, yourcolleagues, your committee members, and your course instructors is intended to improve your scientific work. In parallel, I will work to be responsive to your advice and constructive criticism in all I do.Be prompt. Respond promptly (in most cases, within 48 hours) to emails from anyone in our lab group and show up on time and prepared for meetings. If you need time to gather information in response to an email, please acknowledge receipt of the message and indicate when you can provide the requested information.Help other students with their projects and mentor/train other students. Encourageundergraduates in the lab to help write manuscripts. If you wish to add other individuals as authors to your papers, please discuss this with me early and before potential co-authors.Provide service to the community. Service to our community can mean reviewing journalmanuscripts that will sharpen your scientific perspectives, critical thinking, and presentation skills. It can also mean hosting a lab tour, attending a recruiting event, presenting a poster at a symposium, speaking on a panel, editing a website, joining a march, or showing solidarity with your scientific peers. Their schedules are serendipitous - at some point in your development, you must serve the lab, departmental, University, and scientific communities.Contribute to grant writing and grant progress reports. Grant writing is another usefuldevelopmental activity, particularly for postdoctoral research trainees. As your research ideas take shape, you may help write a grant proposal. This is especially useful if your research drifts from the lab's funded project(s). Many of my graduate students and postdoctoral research associates wrote a proposal to fund their research, and several transferred that language and data to begin their independent research career.You will present your own research, but I may also present your research under my name or the name of the laboratory. If you generate tables / graphs / literature reviews for a project, but do not introduce new insights or make suggestions for new directions, I will generally represent your work myself - in meetings with colleagues, at conferences, and in published papers. Once you own the work by determining the direction and serving as project lead, then you present the work as your own. As I travel the country and globe to talk about the lab's findings, I may also present your work to others but will always credit you by name and often by photo.I am committed to mentoring you, even after you leave my lab. I am committed to youreducation and training while you are in my lab and to guiding your career development - to the degree you wish - long after you leave. I will introduce you to those I have historically mentored or continue to mentor, as they may also serve as strong mentors to you moving forward. I will provide honest letters of evaluation for you when you request them.After graduation or departing from the lab. I remain devoted to supporting the continuedprofessional development of all my lab alumni. Like so many relationships forged during a dramatic period of development, the bond between advisor and student is typically a powerful one - if not always a positive one. Mentoring does not end upon leaving the laboratory. I help former students and trainees navigate their careers and recommend opportunities to them. As you continue your career, your accomplishments honor meand enhance the network for all my trainees.